SUBSCRIBE
Can vegans eat honey?
Medically reviewed by Imashi Fernando, MS, RDN, CDCES — Written by Ruth Eagle — Updated on January 5, 2024
Honey production
Using honey
Avoiding honey
Honey alternatives
Summary
Most vegans do not eat honey because they believe it exploits bees. Bees produce honey as a food source to sustain the colony over winter. Taking this food source may cause harm to bees.
Honey is a natural product that many humans enjoy for its sweetness, nutritional value, and versatility. People use it in cooking, baking, traditional medicine, and cosmetics.
Apiculture, or beekeeping, is the practice of maintaining honey bees and hives to produce beeswax, honey, or other bee-related products.
Vegans avoid consuming or using products that harm or exploit animals, including meat, fish, dairy foods, eggs, leather, shellac, silk, or products tested on animals. Many vegans consider beekeeping exploitative, so they avoid eating and using honey.
This article outlines the reasons some people think honey is acceptable in a vegan lifestyle and why many vegans avoid using honey. We also suggest some vegan alternatives to honey.
How is honey made?
Share on Pinterest
knape/Getty Images
Bees collect nectar from flowers to make honey. Natural enzymes in bee saliva break down the nectar into fructose and glucose, which bees store in honeycombs to feed the hive over winter. Constant fanning from bees’ wings evaporates excess water content to leave thick, sticky honey.
Beekeepers extract honey from the hive and then strain it to remove wax and other particles. This leaves raw honey. Often, raw honey is intensely heated or pasteurized to remove pathogens. The result is processed honey.
Learn more about raw vs. processed honey here.
Why do some people believe honey is OK for vegans?
People may think honey is acceptable in a vegan lifestyle due to several beliefs, including:
They believe bees are not animals
Some people think vegans avoid simply eating meat, fish, and products derived from animals.
However, the vegan philosophy
extends to avoiding any product or practice that exploits animals — including insects — for the benefit of humans.
They believe more bees are good for the environment
Bees and other pollinators — such as wasps, beetles, and flies — are essential for pollinating plants.
Without pollinators, plants cannot produce flowers, fruits, and seeds. Therefore, it may seem logical that the more bees there are, the better it is for the natural environment. While this is partly true, large, industrial-scale honeybee colonies tend to monopolize
food sources and crowd out other pollinators, reducing ecosystem diversity.
They believe that bees overproduce honey
Another reason some vegans use honey is that they believe bees produce more honey than they actually need. So, removing much of the honey from hives does not deprive bees of their food source.
However, this may be a simplistic view. According to the Natural Beekeeping Trust in the United Kingdom, honeybees do not overproduce honey. Bee colonies store honey to keep the hive warm during winter and use it as an energy source during the months when there is little to forage.
Learn more about vegan diets here.
Why do some vegans avoid honey?
Reasons for some vegans not eating or using honey products include:
They believe honey production exploits bees
Most honey is produced on an industrial scale by companies that manage vast colonies of honeybees. To maximize profit, they employ practices that some people consider exploitative.
These practices include
:
clipping the wings of queen bees to prevent them from leaving the colony
using pesticides and antibiotics to control pests and pathogens
feeding bees nutritionally inferior sugar syrup to replace their lost honey
They believe honey production harms ecosystems
Large-scale beekeeping can perpetuate the spread of infections among pollinators. This may have contributed to the decline
in pollinator species over the last 50 years.
Honey producers often transport
bee colonies long distances to pollinate crops when they are in flower. Over several months, millions of farmed bees mix with wild pollinators, increasing the likelihood of spreading parasites and infections.
Another impact of bees foraging from single crops is that they do not get diverse nutrients, which impairs their health. They may also have exposure to particular agrochemicals that cause them more harm.
Vegan alternatives to honey
There are many plant-based vegan alternatives to honey. They include:
maple syrup
date syrup
molasses
agave nectar
coconut nectar
rice syrup
barley malt syrup
golden syrup
Vegans may want to check product labels carefully as some syrups contain animal fats or animal-derived defoaming agents.
Learn more about plant-based diets here.
Summary
Most vegans choose not to consume honey or use honey-based products as they believe honey production exploits bees.
However, some people believe raising honeybees is ethical as they help pollinate plants. The counterargument is that the ratio of honeybees to other pollinators is unbalanced and may contribute to a decline in pollinator diversity.
Large-scale honey producers employ practices that many vegans consider unethical, such as taking the honey bees’ nectar and replacing it with sugar syrup with low nutritional value.
If people following a vegan lifestyle would like the sweet taste and sticky consistency of honey, there are several plant-based alternatives, such as agave nectar and maple syrup.
 Nutrition / DietVegan / Vegetarian
How we reviewed this article:
SOURCES









Share this article
RELATED COVERAGE
High-protein vegan foods
Medically reviewed by Katherine Marengo LDN, R.D.
Vegans often find it difficult to eat a lot of protein, but there are many plant based sources of this nutrient, including beans, tofu, quinoa, and…
READ MORE
What is the difference between plant-based and vegan?
Medically reviewed by Grant Tinsley, Ph.D., CSCS,*D, CISSN
Being vegan is a philosophy and way of living, while plant-based refers only to a person's diet. Learn more about the differences here.
READ MORE
The 10 best probiotics for vegans
Medically reviewed by Natalie Butler, R.D., L.D.
While yogurt is a popular probiotic food, it is not suitable for vegans. However, many other plant-based foods contain probiotics, including miso…
READ MORE
Vitamin D supplements may lower blood pressure in older adults with obesity
Vitamin D supplementation may help manage hypertension, particularly in older adults with overweight or obesity, a new study suggests.
READ MORE
Does Celtic sea salt have any benefits?
Celtic sea salt contains trace amounts of healthy minerals, but its benefits do not differ significantly from other types of salt. Learn more about…
READ MORE
Get our newsletter
Keep up with the ever-changing world of medical science with new and emerging developments in health.
SUBSCRIBE
Your privacy is important to us. Any information you provide to us via this website may be placed by us on servers located in countries outside of the EU. If you do not agree to such placement, do not provide the information.
About Us
Contact Us
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Privacy Settings
Advertising Policy
Health Topics
Health Hubs
Medical Affairs
Content Integrity
Newsletters
© 2025 Healthline Media UK Ltd, London, UK. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.
© 2025 Healthline Media UK Ltd, London, UK. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Healthline Media is an RVO Health Company. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional. See additional information.
AboutCareersAdvertise with us
OUR BRANDS
Healthline
Medical News Today
Greatist
Psych Central
Bezzy